welcome back again everyone thanks for
tuning into the China history podcast la
salut Montgomery here with you for the
250th time
sort of a milestone but then again not
really well other than to say it was
also ten years ago last week that the
CHP was launched I'm gonna interrupt
this history of xinyang series to bring
you something special i grilled up to
mark the occasion of my ten year
anniversary be looking for that in this
very same RSS feed I'll keep the
shinjang series going according to
schedule but between part 7 and 8 I'll
sneak in a little surprise for everyone
of course all my patreon supporters have
already heard it as it's been made
available to them more than a week ago
you know one of the several perks of
supporting me on patreon thanks to
everyone for all your support and
listenership all these years you know
also to those of you who just bumped
into me by accident recently and decided
to stick around a heartfelt thanks to
all of you part seven this time history
of Sheen's young that place is starting
to look more familiar to us now the only
thing missing are the we Gers and we'll
finally get to them in this episode we
finished off last time in the afterglow
of the Battle of Telos 7:51
you know in popular Chinese history a
big deal is made of this battle but it
didn't make it a break it for China out
machines young and these Arab and
Persian Muslims China had no beef with
them and other than this
one battle that took place in Kyrgyzstan
along the talus River there would be no
further battles between Arab Muslims and
China so Gow ginger that Korean general
and the employ of the Tong dynasty
well after those car Luke allies sided
with the Arabs and turned on him at
Telos leading to his defeat well he and
his army a band in the western regions
along with pretty much the entire Tong
military presence in Xinjiang well they
had to beat a path ease to go deal with
the Han Liu Shan rebellion that ran from
755 to
in 63 the whole shins young part of the
tongue Empire once again began to slip
away many Chinese still remained behind
in the turpan Basin and baiting and GAO
chang and they'll become part of the
scenery there and added some chineseness
to the melange of cultures already there
for centuries I won't rehash the whole
on Liu Shan rebellion other than to say
it was quite a cataclysm no one counted
all the dead bodies but this rebellion
and the one that followed 11 centuries
later namely the Taiping rebellion both
of those are considered among the most
devastating in all of China history as
far as loss of life and human suffering
were concerned in both of these
rebellions and their day almost but not
quite
brought down the Tong and Qing dynasties
once Shenzhen was denuded of the Tong
armies you can guess who poured into
that power vacuum Tibetans and Turks in
764 during the reign of Tong tights on
the hopes that the dynasty had of a
comeback and Xin Jiang were dashed when
the powerful tibetan army closed down
the Hershey corridor and cut off access
in and out of Xin Jiang from China and
by the early 70s the Tibetan armies had
forced the Chinese to vacate the region
and though it was already pretty much
over for the Tong and Shin Jang that
really spelled the bitter end of one of
the highlights of the dynasty the
Protectorate general to pacify the West
for almost a century and a half on and
off this Tong Protectorate served as the
mechanism that projected Chinese
influence and energized Chinese
interaction with all the great cities
and empires of Central Asia it truly was
as I already stated in its day the most
cosmopolitan region on earth and though
we have a pretty good idea what kind of
commerce was transacted in both
directions we'll never know the
magnitude of ideas scientific data
engineering design
mathematics philosophy and who knows
what else that might have been passed
back and forth that accelerated the
development of humankind in the east and
in the West and like it had always been
since at least the Han Dynasty probably
even before that Shin Jung was the
central crossroads that linked China to
those lands beyond let me just backtrack
a little and give a bit of background to
what was happening in Arabia long before
the Battle of tell us right at the dawn
of the Tong dynasty in 622 when tight
zone was battling with his brothers for
leadership at the genesis of the dynasty
the hijra happened Prophet Muhammad and
his followers left Mecca and rode 300
miles north to Medina then in 630 just
as titles generals were humbling the
eastern turcica gonnit the prophet
return to Mecca defeated his rivals
smashed the idols in the Kaaba and the
five pillars of Islam were taught for
the first time two years later still
during the reign of tight song the
Prophet passed and his followers began
fanning out from Arabia and started
bringing converts to this new faith by
650 one year into the reign of the
gaozong Emperor the momentum of the
Muslim armies in every direction kept
building and so quickly
already by 652 the Muslim armies had
conquered ancient Afghanistan then as it
had been for centuries a once thriving
center for Buddhism trade and
scholarship those Buddha's of Bamiyan
that were blown up in march 2001 by the
Taliban couple hours drive north of
Kabul
they were curved about a century before
the founding of the tongue that's how
long those things lasted and if you
accept the book of tongue the tongue
chew as gospel it mentions that in 651
Islam's third Khalifa sent a second
cousin of the Prophet Muhammad named
Syed ib'n Abu al-qasim
to the imperial capital in Chiang
as the first Arab ambassador to visit
China and he actually did get to meet
the gaozong Emperor and the great and
fearless Arab traders who had been
coming to port cities like Guangzhou and
Changjo for ages we're now arriving as
Muslim Arab traders and the faith they
brought with them and introduced any
potential takers was now being
introduced to China from two directions
via Xinjiang over the long-established
Silk Road trade routes in the West and
from the east through the ever expanding
sea trade via China's maritime Silk Road
the Muslims of the umayyad and abbasid
caliph s will push their enterprise from
Arabia all the way east into the heart
of Central Asia and then it will begin
to rub up against the farthest Western
extremes of the tongue Empire and then
sparks will start flying as we saw in
the Battle of Talas last episode you
know the tongue military didn't have to
abandon ship and rush back to the
heartland a deal with an lushan there
might have been more fighting carried
out between the Muslim armies and the
Chinese but fate intervened before any
bad blood could be spilled that would
lead to acts of revenge at a later date
and as we'll see once China abandoned
Xin Jiang to deal with matters closer to
home it's gonna be a long time before
the Chinese are able to come back and
take over Xin Zhao as they had done it
in the Han and in the Tong dynasties
okay back in part 5 we briefly
introduced the Turks the Turkic people
not the Turkish once the second Turkic
Agana tour Empire Falls in 744 a great
diaspora began for these Turks from
Mongolia and Eastern you a left there
Mongolian homeland for lands further
south and west and what are the most
famous of these Turkic people certainly
in our day are the Uighur they were the
ones who put together a confederation of
allies who had led the fight in the
defeat of the second
turcica gonnit the weekers were one of
the Turkic people who made friends with
a tongue and allowed themselves to be
used by the ruling Li family to act as
their proxies in all kinds of
territorial and political matters north
of the Great Wall
like it is with all these tribes of
nomadic people great and small who made
a life on the Mongolian steppe but they
didn't leave any photographic evidence
of their origins nor did they leave
behind any detailed written histories
but little by little Clues have revealed
themselves that have led to more
understanding in the early history of
the weavers the Chinese today call the
wee Gers the way we are but back in the
earliest days during and before the Tong
they refer to them as the way huh or the
way who as well as other names and like
it is with a lot of these people whose
homeland was in and around present-day
Mongolia their history was mostly
written by their sedentary but sometimes
warlike neighbors to the south of their
lands the Chinese kept all this written
down and meticulously so it's believed
the most ancient origins of the weigert
was in the archon River Valley smack dab
in the center of Mongolia nothing
special about them just another tribe of
Turkic people with features
they only came to prominence around the
7th century at the time of the fall of
the first Turkic agon it's in 630 let me
mention the wee Gers didn't just
magically appear during the Tang Dynasty
all these years going back to the Xiang
nu during the Western Han and during the
rise and fall of the Shen Bay and the
Kirk Turks they've been there all that
time in the background making and
breaking alliances with the best of them
there are some scholars who suggest that
the we girls were one of the many
peoples who emerge from the show-nu but
that's never been proven not that any
scholars of Turkic history whatever
stoop to listen to this long-running
history show but if they did they might
be wondering how is it
up to now I still haven't mentioned a
very important Turkic group the Thiele
that's yella we're not one single people
and again no exact knowledge of their
origins they were mentioned many times
and the Chinese annals as the schrrle
and also as the culture among other
names without getting into any
complicated detail of the Thiele and all
the tribes and clans they were comprised
of it's believed the wee girls might
have come from them and the wee Gers
were among the early tribes who as the
eastern turkic khaganate started to fall
apart
found it beneficial for their future to
hitch their wagon to the Tong dynasty's
fortune during the 650s one of the clans
amongst the Uighur called the yog lekar
rose to dominate this group and they
whether they deserved it or not took on
the mantle of the Uighur and made this
their political identity what the
Asscher na clan was to the ger Turks
that's who the Aligarh were to the
weavers so these wee girls who emerge
from these thiele or Gaucho people from
Mongolia were early allies of the Tong
and they fought for these armies that we
saw last episode usually led by eastern
Turkey aristocrats from the Asscher na
clan of the garter --xs most famously as
we saw by Asher Nash are so if you bump
into any of the 10 million or more
Weaver's in shinjang and three hundred
thousand and Uzbekistan Kazakhstan and
Kyrgyzstan those we girls don't look so
much like the ones from the 7th and 8th
centuries who I said appeared more like
what you'd expect to see up in Mongolia
so how did the weekers end up in
Xinjiang and later on get a whole
autonomous region in China named after
them well this is thanks in great part
to the Tong dynasty who as I said
already enjoyed a nice working
relationship with the weaker Turks going
back to the undoing of the eastern
turkic khaganate they couldn't stand
each other but both sides
needed the other to shore up their
respective shortcomings during the six
90s in order to tear down the eastern
turcica Gannett's tonk envoys had
approached the Weger and convinced them
to join together with two other major
tribes the one was the car Luke's who I
mentioned last time the turncoats who
caused gaussian Jers defeat at Telos and
the other was called the bus mill so
this alliance of we Gers car Luke's and
boss mill were able to defeat their
overlords in the eastern turkic
khaganate and this was in 744 for almost
a century beginning in the year 744 and
lasting till 840 the we girls
established their own cog on it in these
very same lands that had been once part
of the show new empire then the shen bay
ro ron kirk turks and now the weekers
and this cagin had stretched from the
edges of Manchuria due west to where
western mongolia blends together with
russia kazakhstan and northern Xinjiang
the Weger and the car looks
not long after teamed up to defeat their
boss male allies and after putting them
away and chasing them far away from this
part of the step the we Gers ended up
turning on the car looks as well and
made fast work of them and with these
two former allies out of the way the wee
Gurkha gadot began to take off the
capital was built at or do Baalak on the
west bank of the or khan river or khan
valley where so much mongolian history
is centred this is not too far from
where the mongols will build their
mighty capital Karakoram the we Gers to
have their own great and mighty champion
who lifted them up to the big time this
was the second cog on by unter khan son
of the founder in the chinese histories
he was called evil kahan this Weger
leader the greatest the cog on earth
would see in its century of dominance
between 747 and 755 finished up the
conquest of all lands between Manchuria
and the sir Darya River
that ran from the Tian Shan in western
Xin Jiang all the way to the ROC then in
756 one year into the an Lucien
rebellion the tongue suits own emperor
with lo yang and now Chung on in rebel
hands knocked on by unsure Khan's door
not so much requesting his help as much
as he was begging for it the following
year soldiers from the we Gurkha gonnit
helped tamp down the rebellion and
though it didn't spell the end of the
chaos and killing I'm Liu Shan himself
was killed but his progeny would keep
the fight going until 760 to 763 suits
on was of course the son of Shen Zhong
the great Emperor Ming who on his
deathbed bequeathed the I'm Liu Shan
rebellion to his son now aside from
hastening the decline of the Tang
Dynasty the on lu shan rebellion lasted
seven years two months in a day and to
seal the deal between the tang dynasty
and the we Gurkha Gannett's a marriage
alliance was carried out that saw the
daughters of both the tongue and Weger
rulers matched up with princes from each
other's land and I don't want to say
that had it not been for the wee Gurkha
gonnit and their allies such as the car
Luc's that the Tong dynasty would have
been swept away but the way things were
going in the early years of the on Liu
Shan rebellion it was looking that way
the Tong Weger Alliance was also
fortified with 4,000 Raby and soldiers
of fortune sent with the compliments of
the second Abbasid caliph abu jafar
abdullah ii bin mohammed al Mansour the
Tong dynasty fighting for it's very
survival had to invite many dangerous
allies into their world and once they
came some of them never left the Weger
forces didn't fight for the tongue
because they liked them to secure their
military support at such a time of
crisis as the unleash on rebellion the
we girls extracted a very heavy price
for their assistance paid in silk royal
titles and other luxury goods had it not
been for the Uighur it
very likely the Tong dynasty would have
only lasted till the mid eight century
their role in mopping up this mess
created by Emperor Shen song and his
beloved young qui fais it was quite
profound and the Weger
milked the Tong Court for all it was
worth
the wee Gurkha garnet capital as I
mentioned was located in or do Ballack
and their government and administration
was heavily fortified with sogdians who
migrated there after the Arabs over ran
their idyllic lands and sogdiana and
other locations to the west in and
around the Fergana Valley that's how the
sogdians ended up in or do ba leek in
the numbers they did and the Weger
elites and aristocrats saw a lot of good
things and sophistication that the
sogdians could lend to their coggan it
all the centuries of playing a key role
in the transaction of Silk Road Commerce
had taught them a thing or two about
running an administration and how you
managed it and they became officials in
the wee Gurkha Ghana and managed all the
levers and buttons of their government
administration and these sogdians who
had fled to Mongolia also brought with
them their culture and religion as well
that's why so many wee girls among their
aristocracy took to mana ki ism like
they did in later on to Buddhism as well
but not Islam not yet anyway in fact by
insure Khan son
Burcu was the one royal who had gone
head over heels for mana ki ism and
along with the royal family and no small
amount of aristocrats converted to the
faith and in time anarchism became the
state religion of the weaker cagin it
and I'm not sure if I mentioned this yet
but the sogdians
also lent their written alphabet to the
weekers and once it was adopted the
Weger with their Altaic spoken language
wrote their texts using this
indo-european Indo Iran
this script later on became known as the
old Weger alphabet the we Gers found
faith
not just in the Sogdian alphabet there
were so much else about the SAG dance
culturally that was also absorbed by the
weavers and let me also add just as the
weavers looked at the sogdians as their
cultural gurus well much later on when
the mongol empire was having its great
moment in world history they looked at
the Weger in much the same way we ger
administrators had a huge hand in the
actual running of the mongol empire
some argue that this embrace of sati and
culture softened the we Gers up and
allowed them to turn their back on their
traditionally rough-and-tumble lifestyle
of the steppe which ultimately led to
their being overthrown by a less
cultured but better armed competing
tribe the sogdians also acted as the we
Gers agents and carrying out the horse
silk trade this was one of the primary
ways that the we girls leaned on their
Chinese partners the Chinese had a never
ending demand for horses to fight in
their battles nothing had changed since
the Western Han China could never get
enough all the way up to the 20th
century in fact they remained a constant
horse shortage well up in the we Gurkha
got it there are lots of horses all that
expanse of grasslands not suited for
agriculture so much but Mongolia was -
horses and sheep what Saudi Arabia would
become for oil you remember of course
from that epic 10 part series I did back
in 2014-2015 on the history of tea well
they had the tea horse trade and the
famous Chamaco dal the ancient tea horse
rode to facilitate the trade of tea for
horses
well this horse silk trade during the
late tong was a little less equitable
with the exchange rate of horses for
silk said it's such a rate that well the
price of each horse was much higher than
what the market would yield extortion
and intimidation it always worked but
besides that the chaos in northern China
caused by the rebellion had shattered
the economy to the extent
that everything was thrown out of whack
and there were wild fluctuations in the
exchange rate between silk and horses
you know this silk that I'm talking
about here wasn't silk brocade
ready-to-wear it was all raw silk
something the we Gers and any nomads had
little or no use for but this silk
traded for horses was a commodity in
itself and just like Yogi Berra once
said cash was just as good as money so
it was with silk back then the we Gers
took all this silk acquired from the
Chinese and traded it for commodities
that they needed and these traders with
all that raw silk now with them take it
to markets in the West for processing or
reselling in 779 there was a big
shake-up in the we Gurkha Gannett that
sauber coca GaN meeting his end
along with his whole extended family and
any supporters about 2,000 lives in toto
they were all killed by Anouk agon who
took over between 779 and 789 the time
of the tongue its own emperor you won't
find it hard to believe that about
midway into the 9th century internal
dissension and other problems led to a
decline in the power and togetherness of
the we Gurkha GaN it happens all the
time
and while the weavers were having their
issues the Tibetans took advantage of
this dissension and began moving in on
all Weger held lands in the Turin basin
and what followed was the Weger tibetan
war which saw the Tibetans emerge on top
and the Uighur were pushed out of these
rich lands the Weger
had a Sogdian problem they depended
heavily on the sog dance to manage their
government administration very much in
the manner that eunuchs were used
throughout Chinese imperial history and
just like the unit's had these sogdians
had their detractors and the weaker
governments who weren't on board with
everything that they were doing and this
group was one of several factions that
arose at the top there was the pro
and anti Sogdian factions and like we'll
see amongst the Mongol Empire much later
on some wanted to maintain their
traditional steppe culture and ways and
some wanted to settle down and become
less warlike going back to the Xiang Yu
and the Han Dynasty it had always been a
case of one badass after another north
of China's Great Wall who were able to
unite the nomads into one fighting force
that allowed them to enjoy the fruits of
hegemony and to also glom off the fan of
the Chinese lands to the south in 844
the wee Gurkha gonnit and their 15
minutes were up there was a new power
who was not only able to put an end to
this political organization they even
chased the we girls out of these
homelands in Mongolia so if you were
ever wondering how did all these
turkic-speaking wee girls from lands and
core Mongolia end up in Xinjiang well
this is how it happened they were pushed
out by a group we know as the yin sa
care geese they recall that because
their homeland ran along the Yenisei
River fifth longest in the world the
source of the yen assay is in northern
Mongolia and like the Nile it flows
northward and the yin si empties out
into the Arctic Ocean they had been
beating up on the Weger
on and off since almost the founding of
the qug on it the Yenisei care gi's had
been around since 550 and their base was
in a very well watered area along this
great river just beyond the Northwest
borders of present-day Mongolia then as
I said in 840 the lands that had once
belonged to so many nations of the
Mongolian steppe including the weekers
now belong to these Yenisei Kyrgyz who
like the wiggers are said to have also
been originally part of these thiele
Turkic people these care gives of the
lake tongue dynasty we're not the same
care geez you might run into on the
streets of Bishkek today these yeni sake
Aries are also referred to as the
ancient carries i guess what's important
for our story is that they were next in
line after the wee Gurkha Gannet to
become the dominant power of the steppe
and as the wee girls had done to the car
Luke's the NSA carries chase the wee
girls out of their Mongolian homeland
and into the basin's of Xin Jiang and
elsewhere too but mainly she's young so
840 ce1180 years ago with the fall of
the wee Gurkha Gannet they too had their
own little Hazra or departure to the
west in three general directions and
established three kingdoms lasting
various lengths of time we'll see from
here on out it's still quite a
complicated history with the same old
reliable avalanche of hard to remember
names of people battles and ephemeral
names of forgotten places all written
down in the official histories but for
the most part well not only will you be
happy to know but I'm happy to say for
our Shin Jang story well as far as the
wee girls went this new age and their
history will take us all the way to 1759
so beginning right here in the mid 90s
turi of these three kingdoms I'm going
to introduce is where the more recent
history of Xin Zhong starts to happen so
this Weger diaspora they mainly ended up
in three places
Gansu Ching hai and Shin Jung and rather
than start introducing these kingdoms
set up by the wee Gers and Shin Jang
class dismissed
let's allow the curtain to fall right
here until next time when I hope we can
meet again I'll spare you the patreon
and PayPal donation pitch this time
instead let me announce one more time
and we'll be uploading a special CHP
series to mark the occasion of the
10-year anniversary of the China history
podcast I'll start publishing them in a
day or so and by the time we get to the
next episode part 8 in this Xin Zhong
series the entirety of this special
program will have been posted so I do
hope you'll check that out
okay this is Lazlo Montgomery for the
two hundred and fiftieth time signing
off from Los Angeles California a please
think about coming back for more.we Gers
next time in part eight they're gonna
set up a kingdom out and shinned young
that doesn't fall to the thirteenth
century so I hope to see you all next
time for another exciting episode of
that China history podcast